PWA first tutorial: first 3 parts (#26891)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/progressive_web_apps/tutorials/intro/manifest_file/index.md

---
title: PWA manifest and iconography
slug: Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file
---

{{PreviousMenuNext("Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/JavaScript_functionality", "Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Secure", "Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro")}}

{{PWASidebar}}

A PWA manifest file is a JSON file that provides information about the features of that app to make it look and behave like a native app when installed on the user's device. The manifest contains metadata for your app, including its name, icons, and presentational directives.

> The manifest file contains information about the PWA's identity, presentation, and iconography. While the only requirement is to include a name using the `name` or `short_name` key, you should also include icon information, the URL to be opened when the PWA is launched, and type of application viewport in which the PWA should be viewed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the only requirement is to include a name using the `name` or `short_name` key, you should also include icon information, the URL to be opened when the PWA is launched, and type of application viewport in which the PWA should be viewed.
```

This first sentence seems like a repeat of the previous one.

> The manifest file contains information about the PWA's identity, presentation, and iconography. While the only requirement is to include a name using the `name` or `short_name` key, you should also include icon information, the URL to be opened when the PWA is launched, and type of application viewport in which the PWA should be viewed.

Reviewer: It depends what you mean by requirement. Will wrote a guide about PWA installation and it lists the manifest members that are required to install a PWA on a device: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable#required_manifest_members

A minimalist manifest file for our menstrual cycle tracking app could look like this:

```js
{
  "short_name": "CT",
  "icons": [
    {
      "src": "icon-512.png",
      "sizes": "512x512"
    }
  ]
}
```

> Before saving the manifest file and linking to it from our HTML file, let's discuss we can develop a still brief but more informative JSON object to define the identity, presentation, and iconography of the PWA. Yes, the above would work, but let's discuss a few more keys that enable manifest files to better define the appearance of our PWA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before saving the manifest file and linking to it from our HTML file, we can develop a still brief but more informative JSON object to define the identity, presentation, and iconography of the PWA. Yes, the above would work, but let's discuss a few more members that enable manifest files to better define the appearance of our PWA.
```

## App identity

> To identity your PWA the JSON must include a `name` or `short_name` key, or both, to define the PWA name. It can also include a `description`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To identity your PWA the JSON must include a `name` or `short_name` member, or both, to define the PWA name. It can also include a `description`.
```

Top-level properties of a web app manifest are called members. We've been using that name in other PWA docs on MDN. It'd be good to stick to it consistently if we can.

---
title: PWA manifest and iconography
slug: Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file
---

{{PreviousMenuNext("Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/JavaScript_functionality", "Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Secure", "Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro")}}

{{PWASidebar}}

A PWA manifest file is a JSON file that provides information about the features of that app to make it look and behave like a native app when installed on the user's device. The manifest contains metadata for your app, including its name, icons, and presentational directives.

> While according to the spec, all of the manifest members, or keys, are optional, some are browsers, operating systems, and app distributors have requirements, with a manifest needing to include specific keys for a web app to be a PWA. By including a name using the `name` or `short_name` key, icons that meet the minimum requirements, the URL to be opened when the PWA is launched, and type of application viewport in which the PWA should be viewed, your app will meet the manifest requirements of a PWA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While according to the spec, all of the manifest members, or keys, are optional, some browsers, operating systems, and app distributors have requirements to include specific keys for a web app to be a PWA. By including a name using the `name` or `short_name` key, icons that meet the minimum requirements, the URL to be opened when the PWA is launched, and type of application viewport in which the PWA should be viewed, your app will meet the manifest requirements of a PWA.
```

Feel free to change this suggestion, but the original sentence sounded a bit odd to me.

> A minimalist manifest file for our menstrual cycle tracking app could look like this:

Reviewer: I would be good to link to Will's article about the required members, since that's the place that's most likely to be up to date.

```js
{
  "short_name": "CT",
  "start_url" : "/",
  "icons": [
    {
      "src": "icon-512.png",
      "sizes": "512x512"
    }
  ],

>   "display": "browser"

Reviewer: I think that, today, on all OS and devices, the `display:browser` does **not** make a web app a PWA. To be tested, but I think browsers won't offer the button to install the app if this display mode is used. So, even if you have a section about this later, it might make sense to use the `standalone` display mode here instead. Just for illustration purposes.

### Example solution

```js
{
  "name": "Menstrual Cycle Tracker",
  "short_name": "CT",
  "description": "Securily and confidentially track your menstrual cycle. Enter the start and end dates of your periods, saving the data to your browser."
}
```

## App presentation

The appearance, or presentation, of a PWA's installed and offline experiences are defined in the manifest. Presentation manifest include the `start_url` and `display` keys, and keys which can be used to [customize your app colors](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Customize_your_app_colors), including `theme_color` and `background_color`.

- [`start_url`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/start_url)

  - : The start page when a user launches the PWA.

- [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/display)
  - : Controls the app's display mode including `fullscreen`, `standalone`, which displays the [PWA as a standalone application](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Create_a_standalone_app), `minimal-ui`, which is similar to a standalone view but with UI elements for controlling navigation, and `browser`, which opens the app in a regular browser view.

> There is also an `orientation` key to define the PWA's default orientation as `portrait` or `landscape`. As our app works either way, we'll omit this key.

Reviewer: I would personally prefer if we used `member` instead of `key` throughout this article, since that's how we refer to this in other articles we've written. Consistency should help readers understand what these things are. Additionally, this is also the spec vocabulary.

### Colors

- [`theme_color`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/theme_color)
  - : The default [color of operating system and browser UI elements](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Customize_your_app_colors#define_a_theme_color) such as the status bar on some mobile experiences and the application title bar on desktop operating systems.
- [`background_color`](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest/background_color)
  - : A placeholder color to be displayed as the [background of the app](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Customize_your_app_colors#customize_the_app_window_background_color) until the CSS is loaded. To create a smooth transition between app launch and load, it is recommended to use the [`<color>`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color_value) declared as the app's [`background-color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background-color) color.

### Task

Add presentation definitions to the manifest file you began creating in the previous task.

### Example solution

> As the example application is a single page, we can use `"/"`, or omit the key altogether. For that same reason, we can display cycleTracker without browser tools, setting the `display` to `standalone`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the example application is a single page, we can use `"/"` as the `start_url`, or omit the member altogether. For that same reason, we can display the app without the browser UI by setting the `display` to `standalone`.
```

In [our CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/HTML_and_CSS#css_file), the `background-color: #efe;` is set on the `body` element selector. We use `#eeffee` to ensure a smooth transition from placeholder appearance to app load.

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```js
{
  "name": "...",
  "short_name": "...",
  "description": "...",
  "start_url": "/",
  "theme_color": "#eeffee",
  "background_color": "#eeffee",
  "display": "standalone"
}
```

## App iconography

> PWA icons help users identify your app, make it more visually appealing, and improve discoverability. The PWA app icon appears on home screens, app launchers, browser address bars, in app store search results: When users search for apps in the app store, the PWA icon will be displayed in the search results. The size of the rendered icon and the file requirements varies depending on where it is displayed and by whom. The manifest is where you define your images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PWA icons help users identify your app, make it more visually appealing, and improve discoverability. The PWA app icon appears on home screens, app launchers, or app store search results. The size of the rendered icon and the file requirements varies depending on where it is displayed and by whom. The manifest is where you define your images.
```

Just a suggestion to remove the address bar because the favicon is used there, not the manifest icon (afaik).

Within the manifest JSON object, the `icons` key specifies an array of one or more icon objects for use in different contexts, each with a `src` and `sizes` key, and optional `type` and `purpose` keys. Each icon object's' `src` list the source of a single image file. The `sizes` key provides a list of space-separated sizes for which that particular image should be used or the keyword `any`; the value is the same as the {{HTMLElement("link")}} element's [`sizes`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/link#sizes) attribute. The `type` key lists the image's MIME type.

```js
{
  "name": "MyApp",

>   "icons: [

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "icons": [
```

    {
      "src": "icon/tiny.webp",
      "sizes": "48x48"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/small.png",
      "sizes": "72x72 96x96 128x128 256x256",
      "purpose": "maskable"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/large.png",
      "sizes": "512x512"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/scalable.svg",
      "sizes": "any"
    }
  ]
}
```

> The `purpose` keys should be set to `maskable` defining [icona as adaptive](https://web.dev/maskable-icon/).

Reviewer: Hm, I'm having trouble parsing this sentence. 
Also, not all icons need to be maskable. And we might want to link to https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Define_app_icons#support_masking for more information on this topic.

> All icons should have the same look and feel to ensure users recognize your PWA, but the larger the icon, the greater the detail it can contain. All icon files are squares. Include safe zones so that when the image is masked by the operating system, it renders okay as a circle.

Reviewer: It might make sense to expand a little bit on what the safe zone is. We can borrow some of the text from that "support masking" section I mentioned before if needed.

```html hidden
<div>
  <img alt="a green circle" src="circle.svg" role="img" />
  <img alt="a simple wheel" src="tire.svg" role="img" />
  <img alt="a detailed wheel" src="wheel.svg" role="img" />
</div>
```

```css hidden
div {
  display: flex;
  gap: 5px;
}
img {
  width: 33%;
}
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("PWA iconography", 600, 250)}}

### Example solution

```js
{
  "name": "...",
  "short_name": "...",
  "description": "...",
  "start_url": "...",
  "theme_color": "...",
  "background_color": "...",
  "display": "...",
  "icons": [
        {
      "src": "circle.ico",
      "sizes": "48x48"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/circle.svg",
      "sizes": "72x72 96x96",
      "purpose": "maskable"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/tire.svg",
      "sizes": "128x128 256x256"
    },
    {
      "src": "icon/wheel.svg",
      "sizes": "512x512"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Adding the manifest to the app

You now have a fully usable manifest file. Time to save it and link to it from our HTML file.

The manifest file extension can be the specification suggestion `.webappmanifest`. However, being a JSON file, it is most commonly saved with the browser-supported `.json` extension.

> PWAs require a manifest file. We have a fully functional app, but it's not yet a PWA. We have to add the manifest the app. The web manifest is an external JSON file. To include the external JSON resource, the `rel="manifest"` is used. The `href` attribute of the `<link>` points to the location of the resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PWAs require a manifest file to be linked from the app's HTML document. We have a fully functional app, but it's not yet a PWA because it doesn't link to our external manifest JSON file yet. To include the external JSON resource, we use the `<link>` element, with the `rel="manifest"` attribute, and setting the `href` attribute to the location of the resource.
```

Just a suggestion to improve the flow of this paragraph, which seemed a bit hard to follow at first read.

```html
<link rel="manifest" href="cycletracker.json" />
```

The `<link>` element is most commonly used to link to stylesheets and, with PWAs, the required manifest file, but is also used to establish site icons (both "favicon" style icons and icons for the home screen and apps on mobile devices) among other things.

```html
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="icons/circle.svg" />
```

When using the `.webmanifest` extension, set `type="application/manifest+json"` if your server doesn't support that MIME type.

#### Task

Save the manifest file that you have created in the steps above, then link to it from the `index.html` file.

#### Example solution

View the [`cycletracker.manifest` file](https://mdn.github.io/pwa-examples/cycletracker/Manifest_file/cycletracker.manifest) and view the [project source code](https://github.com/mdn/pwa-examples/tree/master/cycletracker/Manifest_file) on GitHub.

## Up next

> Now that we have a PWA manifest file, let's [create a secure connection](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Secure). While no frameworks are needed to create a PWA, we will use X to create a secure connection; a PWA requirement.

Reviewer: Curious what you have in mind with framework X in this sentence?
Note that when you're working on localhost (as most devs will do), there is no need for a secure connection. The browser will allow installing the PWA on http if the domain is localhost.
